<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IX</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter IX" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337639776140"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter IX</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">New Troubles</h3></div></div></div><p>When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys, when
Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words, Thou art free! the
moment seemed improbable and unprecedented; a ray of vivid light, a ray
of the true light of the living, suddenly penetrated within him. But it
was not long before this ray paled. Jean Valjean had been dazzled by
the idea of liberty. He had believed in a new life. He very speedily
perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is
provided.</p><p>And this was encompassed with much bitterness. He had calculated that
his earnings, during his sojourn in the galleys, ought to amount to
a hundred and seventy–one francs. It is but just to add that he had
forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays
and festival days during nineteen years, which entailed a diminution
of about eighty francs. At all events, his hoard had been reduced by
various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen
sous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. He had
understood nothing of this, and had thought himself wronged. Let us say
the word—robbed.</p><p>On the day following his liberation, he saw, at Grasse, in front of
an orange–flower distillery, some men engaged in unloading bales. He
offered his services. Business was pressing; they were accepted. He set
to work. He was intelligent, robust, adroit; he did his best; the master
seemed pleased. While he was at work, a gendarme passed, observed
him, and demanded his papers. It was necessary to show him the yellow
passport. That done, Jean Valjean resumed his labor. A little while
before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amount which they
earned each day at this occupation; he had been told thirty sous. When
evening arrived, as he was forced to set out again on the following day,
he presented himself to the owner of the distillery and requested to be
paid. The owner did not utter a word, but handed him twenty–five sous. He
objected. He was told, "That is enough for thee." He persisted. The
master looked him straight between the eyes, and said to him "Beware of
the prison."</p><p>There, again, he considered that he had been robbed.</p><p>Society, the State, by diminishing his hoard, had robbed him wholesale.
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail.</p><p>Liberation is not deliverance. One gets free from the galleys, but not
from the sentence.</p><p>That is what happened to him at Grasse. We have seen in what manner he
was received at Digne</p></section><footer/></body></html>
