<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VIII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s09.xhtml" title="Chapter IX"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter VIII" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337644937140"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter VIII</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Death of a Horse</h3></div></div></div><p>"The dinners are better at Edon's than at Bombarda's," exclaimed
Zephine.</p><p>"I prefer Bombarda to Edon," declared Blachevelle. "There is more
luxury. It is more Asiatic. Look at the room downstairs; there are
mirrors [glaces] on the walls."</p><p>"I prefer them [glaces, ices] on my plate," said Favourite.</p><p>Blachevelle persisted:—</p><p>"Look at the knives. The handles are of silver at Bombarda's and of bone
at Edon's. Now, silver is more valuable than bone."</p><p>"Except for those who have a silver chin," observed Tholomyes.</p><p>He was looking at the dome of the Invalides, which was visible from
Bombarda's windows.</p><p>A pause ensued.</p><p>"Tholomyes," exclaimed Fameuil, "Listolier and I were having a
discussion just now."</p><p>"A discussion is a good thing," replied Tholomyes; "a quarrel is
better."</p><p>"We were disputing about philosophy."</p><p>"Well?"</p><p>"Which do you prefer, Descartes or Spinoza?"</p><p>"Desaugiers," said Tholomyes.</p><p>This decree pronounced, he took a drink, and went on:—</p><p>"I consent to live. All is not at an end on earth since we can still
talk nonsense. For that I return thanks to the immortal gods. We lie.
One lies, but one laughs. One affirms, but one doubts. The unexpected
bursts forth from the syllogism. That is fine. There are still human
beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the
paradox merrily. This, ladies, which you are drinking with so tranquil
an air is Madeira wine, you must know, from the vineyard of Coural das
Freiras, which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above the level of
the sea. Attention while you drink! three hundred and seventeen fathoms!
and Monsieur Bombarda, the magnificent eating–house keeper, gives you
those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty
centimes."</p><p>Again Fameuil interrupted him:—</p><p>"Tholomyes, your opinions fix the law. Who is your favorite author?"</p><p>"Ber—"</p><p>"Quin?"</p><p>"No; Choux."</p><p>And Tholomyes continued:—</p><p>"Honor to Bombarda! He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but
get me an Indian dancing–girl, and Thygelion of Chaeronea if he could
bring me a Greek courtesan; for, oh, ladies! there were Bombardas in
Greece and in Egypt. Apuleius tells us of them. Alas! always the same,
and nothing new; nothing more unpublished by the creator in creation!
Nil sub sole novum, says Solomon; amor omnibus idem, says Virgil; and
Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint–Cloud, as Aspasia
embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos. One last word. Do you
know what Aspasia was, ladies? Although she lived at an epoch when women
had, as yet, no soul, she was a soul; a soul of a rosy and purple
hue, more ardent hued than fire, fresher than the dawn. Aspasia was
a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met; she was the goddess
prostitute; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut. Aspasia was created in case a
mistress should be needed for Prometheus."</p><p>Tholomyes, once started, would have found some difficulty in stopping,
had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment. The
shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt. It was a
Beauceron mare, old and thin, and one fit for the knacker, which was
dragging a very heavy cart. On arriving in front of Bombarda's, the
worn–out, exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further. This
incident attracted a crowd. Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter
had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word, Matin (the
jade), backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip, when the jade fell,
never to rise again. On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby,
Tholomyes' merry auditors turned their heads, and Tholomyes took
advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with
this melancholy strophe:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Elle etait de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses <a href="#ftn.id1172295069871" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172295069871">[3]</sup></a></td></tr><tr><td>Ont le meme destin;</td></tr><tr><td>Et, rosse, elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses,</td></tr><tr><td>L'espace d'un matin!"</td></tr></table><p>"Poor horse!" sighed Fantine.</p><p>And Dahlia exclaimed:—</p><p>"There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses. How can one be
such a pitiful fool as that!"</p><p>At that moment Favourite, folding her arms and throwing her head back,
looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said:—</p><p>"Come, now! the surprise?"</p><p>"Exactly. The moment has arrived," replied Tholomyes. "Gentlemen,
the hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck. Wait for us a
moment, ladies."</p><p>"It begins with a kiss," said Blachevelle.</p><p>"On the brow," added Tholomyes.</p><p>Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress's brow; then all four filed
out through the door, with their fingers on their lips.</p><p>Favourite clapped her hands on their departure.</p><p>"It is beginning to be amusing already," said she.</p><p>"Don't be too long," murmured Fantine; "we are waiting for you."</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172295069871" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172295069871" class="para"><sup class="para">[3] </sup></a>She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages
share the same fate; and a jade herself, she lived, as jades live, for
the space of a morning (or jade).</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
