<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IX</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/><link rel="next" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Book Fourth."/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter IX" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337644920120"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter IX</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">A Merry End to Mirth</h3></div></div></div><p>When the young girls were left alone, they leaned two by two on the
window–sills, chatting, craning out their heads, and talking from one
window to the other.</p><p>They saw the young men emerge from the Cafe Bombarda arm in arm. The
latter turned round, made signs to them, smiled, and disappeared in
that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the
Champs–Elysees.</p><p>"Don't be long!" cried Fantine.</p><p>"What are they going to bring us?" said Zephine.</p><p>"It will certainly be something pretty," said Dahlia.</p><p>"For my part," said Favourite, "I want it to be of gold."</p><p>Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of the
lake, which they could see through the branches of the large trees, and
which diverted them greatly.</p><p>It was the hour for the departure of the mail–coaches and diligences.
Nearly all the stage–coaches for the south and west passed through the
Champs–Elysees. The majority followed the quay and went through the
Passy Barrier. From moment to moment, some huge vehicle, painted yellow
and black, heavily loaded, noisily harnessed, rendered shapeless
by trunks, tarpaulins, and valises, full of heads which immediately
disappeared, rushed through the crowd with all the sparks of a forge,
with dust for smoke, and an air of fury, grinding the pavements,
changing all the paving–stones into steels. This uproar delighted the
young girls. Favourite exclaimed:—</p><p>"What a row! One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away."</p><p>It chanced that one of these vehicles, which they could only see with
difficulty through the thick elms, halted for a moment, then set out
again at a gallop. This surprised Fantine.</p><p>"That's odd!" said she. "I thought the diligence never stopped."</p><p>Favourite shrugged her shoulders.</p><p>"This Fantine is surprising. I am coming to take a look at her out of
curiosity. She is dazzled by the simplest things. Suppose a case: I am
a traveller; I say to the diligence, 'I will go on in advance; you shall
pick me up on the quay as you pass.' The diligence passes, sees me,
halts, and takes me. That is done every day. You do not know life, my
dear."</p><p>In this manner a certain time elapsed. All at once Favourite made a
movement, like a person who is just waking up.</p><p>"Well," said she, "and the surprise?"</p><p>"Yes, by the way," joined in Dahlia, "the famous surprise?"</p><p>"They are a very long time about it!" said Fantine.</p><p>As Fantine concluded this sigh, the waiter who had served them at dinner
entered. He held in his hand something which resembled a letter.</p><p>"What is that?" demanded Favourite.</p><p>The waiter replied:—</p><p>"It is a paper that those gentlemen left for these ladies."</p><p>"Why did you not bring it at once?"</p><p>"Because," said the waiter, "the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver it
to the ladies for an hour."</p><p>Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter's hand. It was, in fact, a
letter.</p><p>"Stop!" said she; "there is no address; but this is what is written on
it—"</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>"THIS IS THE SURPRISE."</p></blockquote></div><p>She tore the letter open hastily, opened it, and read [she knew how to
read]:—</p><p>"OUR BELOVED:—</p><p>"You must know that we have parents. Parents—you do not know much about
such things. They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code,
which is puerile and honest. Now, these parents groan, these old folks
implore us, these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons;
they desire our return, and offer to kill calves for us. Being virtuous,
we obey them. At the hour when you read this, five fiery horses will
be bearing us to our papas and mammas. We are pulling up our stakes, as
Bossuet says. We are going; we are gone. We flee in the arms of Lafitte
and on the wings of Caillard. The Toulouse diligence tears us from
the abyss, and the abyss is you, O our little beauties! We return to
society, to duty, to respectability, at full trot, at the rate of three
leagues an hour. It is necessary for the good of the country that we
should be, like the rest of the world, prefects, fathers of families,
rural police, and councillors of state. Venerate us. We are sacrificing
ourselves. Mourn for us in haste, and replace us with speed. If this
letter lacerates you, do the same by it. Adieu.</p><p>"For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy. We bear you
no grudge for that.                                 "Signed:
                                            BLACHEVELLE.
                                            FAMUEIL.
                                            LISTOLIER.
                                            FELIX THOLOMYES.</p><p>"Postscriptum. The dinner is paid for."</p><p>The four young women looked at each other.</p><p>Favourite was the first to break the silence.</p><p>"Well!" she exclaimed, "it's a very pretty farce, all the same."</p><p>"It is very droll," said Zephine.</p><p>"That must have been Blachevelle's idea," resumed Favourite. "It makes
me in love with him. No sooner is he gone than he is loved. This is an
adventure, indeed."</p><p>"No," said Dahlia; "it was one of Tholomyes' ideas. That is evident.</p><p>"In that case," retorted Favourite, "death to Blachevelle, and long live
Tholomyes!"</p><p>"Long live Tholomyes!" exclaimed Dahlia and Zephine.</p><p>And they burst out laughing.</p><p>Fantine laughed with the rest.</p><p>An hour later, when she had returned to her room, she wept. It was
her first love affair, as we have said; she had given herself to this
Tholomyes as to a husband, and the poor girl had a child.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
