<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337656440080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter XI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Christus Nos Liberavit</h3></div></div></div><p>What is this history of Fantine? It is society purchasing a slave.</p><p>From whom? From misery.</p><p>From hunger, cold, isolation, destitution. A dolorous bargain. A soul
for a morsel of bread. Misery offers; society accepts.</p><p>The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization, but it does
not, as yet, permeate it; it is said that slavery has disappeared from
European civilization. This is a mistake. It still exists; but it weighs
only upon the woman, and it is called prostitution.</p><p>It weighs upon the woman, that is to say, upon grace, weakness, beauty,
maternity. This is not one of the least of man's disgraces.</p><p>At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached, nothing
is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been.</p><p>She has become marble in becoming mire. Whoever touches her feels cold.
She passes; she endures you; she ignores you; she is the severe and
dishonored figure. Life and the social order have said their last word
for her. All has happened to her that will happen to her. She has
felt everything, borne everything, experienced everything, suffered
everything, lost everything, mourned everything. She is resigned, with
that resignation which resembles indifference, as death resembles sleep.
She no longer avoids anything. Let all the clouds fall upon her, and all
the ocean sweep over her! What matters it to her? She is a sponge that
is soaked.</p><p>At least, she believes it to be so; but it is an error to imagine that
fate can be exhausted, and that one has reached the bottom of anything
whatever.</p><p>Alas! What are all these fates, driven on pell–mell? Whither are they
going? Why are they thus?</p><p>He who knows that sees the whole of the shadow.</p><p>He is alone. His name is God.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
