<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch09s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch09s12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337656525300"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter XI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">A Bad Guide to Napoleon; a Good Guide to Bulow</h3></div></div></div><p>The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known. Grouchy hoped for,
Blucher arriving. Death instead of life.</p><p>Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected; it was Saint
Helena that was seen.</p><p>If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow, Blucher's
lieutenant, had advised him to debouch from the forest above
Frischemont, instead of below Plancenoit, the form of the nineteenth
century might, perhaps, have been different. Napoleon would have won the
battle of Waterloo. By any other route than that below Plancenoit,
the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for
artillery, and Bulow would not have arrived.</p><p>Now the Prussian general, Muffling, declares that one hour's delay, and
Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet. "The battle was
lost."</p><p>It was time that Bulow should arrive, as will be seen. He had, moreover,
been very much delayed. He had bivouacked at Dion–le–Mont, and had set
out at daybreak; but the roads were impassable, and his divisions stuck
fast in the mire. The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons. Moreover,
he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre;
the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French, so
the caissons and ammunition–wagons could not pass between two rows of
burning houses, and had been obliged to wait until the conflagration was
extinguished. It was mid–day before Bulow's vanguard had been able to
reach Chapelle–Saint–Lambert.</p><p>Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it would have been over
at four o'clock, and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by
Napoleon. Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which
we cannot comprehend.</p><p>The Emperor had been the first, as early as mid–day, to descry with his
field–glass, on the extreme horizon, something which had attracted his
attention. He had said, "I see yonder a cloud, which seems to me to be
troops." Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie, "Soult, what do you see in
the direction of Chapelle–Saint–Lambert?" The marshal, levelling his
glass, answered, "Four or five thousand men, Sire; evidently Grouchy."
But it remained motionless in the mist. All the glasses of the staff
had studied "the cloud" pointed out by the Emperor. Some said: "It is
trees." The truth is, that the cloud did not move. The Emperor detached
Domon's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter.</p><p>Bulow had not moved, in fact. His vanguard was very feeble, and could
accomplish nothing. He was obliged to wait for the body of the army
corps, and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before
entering into line; but at five o'clock, perceiving Wellington's peril,
Blucher ordered Bulow to attack, and uttered these remarkable words: "We
must give air to the English army."</p><p>A little later, the divisions of Losthin, Hiller, Hacke, and Ryssel
deployed before Lobau's corps, the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia
debouched from the forest of Paris, Plancenoit was in flames, and the
Prussian cannon–balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in
reserve behind Napoleon.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
