<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch09.xhtml" title="Book First."/><link rel="next" href="ch09s02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter I" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337706347520"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter I</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">What is Met With on the Way From Nivelles</h3></div></div></div><p>Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the person
who is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directing his
course towards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuing a broad paved
road, which undulated between two rows of trees, over the hills which
succeed each other, raise the road and let it fall again, and produce
something in the nature of enormous waves.</p><p>He had passed Lillois and Bois–Seigneur–Isaac. In the west he perceived
the slate–roofed tower of Braine–l'Alleud, which has the form of a
reversed vase. He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence; and
at the angle of the cross–road, by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet
bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4, a public house, bearing
on its front this sign: At the Four Winds (Aux Quatre Vents). Echabeau,
Private Cafe.</p><p>A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of a little
valley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through
the embankment of the road. The clump of sparsely planted but very green
trees, which fills the valley on one side of the road, is dispersed over
the meadows on the other, and disappears gracefully and as in order in
the direction of Braine–l'Alleud.</p><p>On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four–wheeled cart
at the door, a large bundle of hop–poles, a plough, a heap of dried
brushwood near a flourishing hedge, lime smoking in a square hole, and
a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions. A young
girl was weeding in a field, where a huge yellow poster, probably of
some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival, was fluttering in
the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in which a flotilla
of ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plunged into the bushes. The
wayfarer struck into this.</p><p>After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of the fifteenth
century, surmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks set in contrast, he
found himself before a large door of arched stone, with a rectilinear
impost, in the sombre style of Louis XIV., flanked by two flat
medallions. A severe facade rose above this door; a wall, perpendicular
to the facade, almost touched the door, and flanked it with an abrupt
right angle. In the meadow before the door lay three harrows, through
which, in disorder, grew all the flowers of May. The door was closed.
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old
rusty knocker.</p><p>The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May,
which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. A brave
little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distracted manner in a
large tree.</p><p>The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation,
resembling the hollow of a sphere, in the stone on the left, at the foot
of the pier of the door.</p><p>At this moment the leaves of the door parted, and a peasant woman
emerged.</p><p>She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.</p><p>"It was a French cannon–ball which made that," she said to him. And she
added:—</p><p>"That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail, is the
hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet did not pierce
the wood."</p><p>"What is the name of this place?" inquired the wayfarer.</p><p>"Hougomont," said the peasant woman.</p><p>The traveller straightened himself up. He walked on a few paces, and
went off to look over the tops of the hedges. On the horizon through the
trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation, and on this elevation
something which at that distance resembled a lion.</p><p>He was on the battle–field of Waterloo.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
