<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VIII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch14s07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/><link rel="next" href="ch14s09.xhtml" title="Chapter IX"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter VIII" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337641119100"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter VIII</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Post Corda Lapides</h3></div></div></div><p>After having sketched its moral face, it will not prove unprofitable
to point out, in a few words, its material configuration. The reader
already has some idea of it.</p><p>The convent of the Petit–Picpus–Sainte–Antoine filled almost the whole
of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue
Polonceau, the Rue Droit–Mur, the Rue Petit–Picpus, and the unused lane,
called Rue Aumarais on old plans. These four streets surrounded this
trapezium like a moat. The convent was composed of several buildings
and a garden. The principal building, taken in its entirety, was a
juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which, viewed from a bird's–eye
view, outlined, with considerable exactness, a gibbet laid flat on the
ground. The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment
of the Rue Droit–Mur comprised between the Rue Petit–Picpus and the Rue
Polonceau; the lesser arm was a lofty, gray, severe grated facade which
faced the Rue Petit–Picpus; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its
extremity. Towards the centre of this facade was a low, arched door,
whitened with dust and ashes, where the spiders wove their webs,
and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays, and on rare
occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the convent. This was the
public entrance of the church. The elbow of the gibbet was a square
hall which was used as the servants' hall, and which the nuns called the
buttery. In the main arm were the cells of the mothers, the sisters, and
the novices. In the lesser arm lay the kitchens, the refectory, backed
up by the cloisters and the church. Between the door No. 62 and the
corner of the closed lane Aumarais, was the school, which was not
visible from without. The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden,
which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau, which caused
the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside. The
garden, which was slightly arched, had in its centre, on the summit of
a hillock, a fine pointed and conical fir–tree, whence ran, as from
the peaked boss of a shield, four grand alleys, and, ranged by twos
in between the branchings of these, eight small ones, so that, if the
enclosure had been circular, the geometrical plan of the alleys would
have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel. As the alleys all ended
in the very irregular walls of the garden, they were of unequal length.
They were bordered with currant bushes. At the bottom, an alley of tall
poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent, which was at the angle of
the Rue Droit–Mur to the house of the Little Convent, which was at the
angle of the Aumarais lane. In front of the Little Convent was what was
called the little garden. To this whole, let the reader add a courtyard,
all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings, prison
walls, the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the
Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood, and he will
be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the
Bernardines of the Petit–Picpus was forty years ago. This holy house
had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis–ground of the
fourteenth to the sixteenth century, which was called the "tennis–ground
of the eleven thousand devils."</p><p>All these streets, moreover, were more ancient than Paris. These names,
Droit–Mur and Aumarais, are very ancient; the streets which bear them
are very much more ancient still. Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane;
the Rue Droit–Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers, for God opened
flowers before man cut stones.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
