<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IX</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch17s08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/><link rel="next" href="ch17s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter IX" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337640604720"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter IX</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Old Soul of Gaul</h3></div></div></div><p>There was something of that boy in Poquelin, the son of the fish–market;
Beaumarchais had something of it. Gaminerie is a shade of the Gallic
spirit. Mingled with good sense, it sometimes adds force to the latter,
as alcohol does to wine. Sometimes it is a defect. Homer repeats himself
eternally, granted; one may say that Voltaire plays the gamin. Camille
Desmoulins was a native of the faubourgs. Championnet, who treated
miracles brutally, rose from the pavements of Paris; he had, when a
small lad, inundated the porticos of Saint–Jean de Beauvais, and of
Saint–Etienne du Mont; he had addressed the shrine of Sainte–Genevieve
familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint Januarius.</p><p>The gamin of Paris is respectful, ironical, and insolent. He has
villainous teeth, because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers, and
handsome eyes because he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, he
would go hopping up the steps of paradise on one foot. He is strong on
boxing. All beliefs are possible to him. He plays in the gutter, and
straightens himself up with a revolt; his effrontery persists even in
the presence of grape–shot; he was a scapegrace, he is a hero; like the
little Theban, he shakes the skin from the lion; Barra the drummer–boy
was a gamin of Paris; he Shouts: "Forward!" as the horse of Scripture
says "Vah!" and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to the
giant.</p><p>This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal. Measure that
spread of wings which reaches from Moliere to Barra.</p><p>To sum up the whole, and in one word, the gamin is a being who amuses
himself, because he is unhappy.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
