<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter III</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch17s02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/><link rel="next" href="ch17s04.xhtml" title="Chapter IV"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter III" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337707152000"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter III</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">He is Agreeable</h3></div></div></div><p>In the evening, thanks to a few sous, which he always finds means
to procure, the homuncio enters a theatre. On crossing that magic
threshold, he becomes transfigured; he was the street Arab, he becomes
the titi.<a href="#ftn.id1172294687474" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172294687474">[18]</sup></a> Theatres are a sort of ship turned upside down with the
keel in the air. It is in that keel that the titi huddle together.
The titi is to the gamin what the moth is to the larva; the same being
endowed with wings and soaring. It suffices for him to be there, with
his radiance of happiness, with his power of enthusiasm and joy, with
his hand–clapping, which resembles a clapping of wings, to confer on
that narrow, dark, fetid, sordid, unhealthy, hideous, abominable keel,
the name of Paradise.</p><p>Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary,
and you have the gamin.</p><p>The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition. His tendency, and we say
it with the proper amount of regret, would not constitute classic
taste. He is not very academic by nature. Thus, to give an example, the
popularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy
children was seasoned with a touch of irony. The gamin called her
Mademoiselle Muche—"hide yourself."</p><p>This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights, has rags like a
baby and tatters like a philosopher, fishes in the sewer, hunts in the
cesspool, extracts mirth from foulness, whips up the squares with his
wit, grins and bites, whistles and sings, shouts, and shrieks, tempers
Alleluia with Matantur–lurette, chants every rhythm from the De
Profundis to the Jack–pudding, finds without seeking, knows what he is
ignorant of, is a Spartan to the point of thieving, is mad to wisdom, is
lyrical to filth, would crouch down on Olympus, wallows in the dunghill
and emerges from it covered with stars. The gamin of Paris is Rabelais
in this youth.</p><p>He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch–pocket.</p><p>He is not easily astonished, he is still less easily terrified, he makes
songs on superstitions, he takes the wind out of exaggerations, he twits
mysteries, he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts, he takes the poetry out
of stilted things, he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas.
It is not that he is prosaic; far from that; but he replaces the solemn
vision by the farcical phantasmagoria. If Adamastor were to appear to
him, the street Arab would say: "Hi there! The bugaboo!"</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172294687474" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172294687474" class="para"><sup class="para">[18] </sup></a>Chicken: slang allusion to the noise made in calling
poultry.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
