<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XVI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch24s15.xhtml" title="Chapter XV"/><link rel="next" href="ch24s17.xhtml" title="Chapter XVII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter XVI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337707185420"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter XVI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">In Which Will be Found the Words to an English Air Which Was in Fashion in 1832</h3></div></div></div><p>Marius seated himself on his bed. It might have been half–past five
o'clock. Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen.
He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a watch
in the dark. He thought of the double march which was going on at that
moment in the dark,—crime advancing on one side, justice coming up on
the other. He was not afraid, but he could not think without a shudder
of what was about to take place. As is the case with all those who are
suddenly assailed by an unforeseen adventure, the entire day produced
upon him the effect of a dream, and in order to persuade himself that he
was not the prey of a nightmare, he had to feel the cold barrels of the
steel pistols in his trousers pockets.</p><p>It was no longer snowing; the moon disengaged itself more and more
clearly from the mist, and its light, mingled with the white reflection
of the snow which had fallen, communicated to the chamber a sort of
twilight aspect.</p><p>There was a light in the Jondrette den. Marius saw the hole in the wall
shining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him.</p><p>It was true that the light could not be produced by a candle. However,
there was not a sound in the Jondrette quarters, not a soul was moving
there, not a soul speaking, not a breath; the silence was glacial and
profound, and had it not been for that light, he might have thought
himself next door to a sepulchre.</p><p>Marius softly removed his boots and pushed them under his bed.</p><p>Several minutes elapsed. Marius heard the lower door turn on its hinges;
a heavy step mounted the staircase, and hastened along the corridor; the
latch of the hovel was noisily lifted; it was Jondrette returning.</p><p>Instantly, several voices arose. The whole family was in the garret.
Only, it had been silent in the master's absence, like wolf whelps in
the absence of the wolf.</p><p>"It's I," said he.</p><p>"Good evening, daddy," yelped the girls.</p><p>"Well?" said the mother.</p><p>"All's going first–rate," responded Jondrette, "but my feet are beastly
cold. Good! You have dressed up. You have done well! You must inspire
confidence."</p><p>"All ready to go out."</p><p>"Don't forget what I told you. You will do everything sure?"</p><p>"Rest easy."</p><p>"Because—" said Jondrette. And he left the phrase unfinished.</p><p>Marius heard him lay something heavy on the table, probably the chisel
which he had purchased.</p><p>"By the way," said Jondrette, "have you been eating here?"</p><p>"Yes," said the mother. "I got three large potatoes and some salt. I
took advantage of the fire to cook them."</p><p>"Good," returned Jondrette. "To–morrow I will take you out to dine with
me. We will have a duck and fixings. You shall dine like Charles the
Tenth; all is going well!"</p><p>Then he added:—</p><p>"The mouse–trap is open. The cats are there."</p><p>He lowered his voice still further, and said:—</p><p>"Put this in the fire."</p><p>Marius heard a sound of charcoal being knocked with the tongs or some
iron utensil, and Jondrette continued:—</p><p>"Have you greased the hinges of the door so that they will not squeak?"</p><p>"Yes," replied the mother.</p><p>"What time is it?"</p><p>"Nearly six. The half–hour struck from Saint–Medard a while ago."</p><p>"The devil!" ejaculated Jondrette; "the children must go and watch. Come
you, do you listen here."</p><p>A whispering ensued.</p><p>Jondrette's voice became audible again:—</p><p>"Has old Bougon left?"</p><p>"Yes," said the mother.</p><p>"Are you sure that there is no one in our neighbor's room?"</p><p>"He has not been in all day, and you know very well that this is his
dinner hour."</p><p>"You are sure?"</p><p>"Sure."</p><p>"All the same," said Jondrette, "there's no harm in going to see whether
he is there. Here, my girl, take the candle and go there."</p><p>Marius fell on his hands and knees and crawled silently under his bed.</p><p>Hardly had he concealed himself, when he perceived a light through the
crack of his door.</p><p>"P'pa," cried a voice, "he is not in here."</p><p>He recognized the voice of the eldest daughter.</p><p>"Did you go in?" demanded her father.</p><p>"No," replied the girl, "but as his key is in the door, he must be out."</p><p>The father exclaimed:—</p><p>"Go in, nevertheless."</p><p>The door opened, and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a candle
in her hand. She was as she had been in the morning, only still more
repulsive in this light.</p><p>She walked straight up to the bed. Marius endured an indescribable
moment of anxiety; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to the
wall, and it was thither that she was directing her steps. She raised
herself on tiptoe and looked at herself in it. In the neighboring room,
the sound of iron articles being moved was audible.</p><p>She smoothed her hair with the palm of her hand, and smiled into the
mirror, humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Nos amours ont dure toute une semaine,<a href="#ftn.id1172294599711" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172294599711">[28]</sup></a></td></tr><tr><td>Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts!</td></tr><tr><td>S'adorer huit jours, c' etait bien la peine!</td></tr><tr><td>Le temps des amours devait durer toujours!</td></tr><tr><td>Devrait durer toujours! devrait durer toujours!</td></tr></table><p>In the meantime, Marius trembled. It seemed impossible to him that she
should not hear his breathing.</p><p>She stepped to the window and looked out with the half–foolish way she
had.</p><p>"How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise!" said she.</p><p>She returned to the mirror and began again to put on airs before it,
scrutinizing herself full–face and three–quarters face in turn.</p><p>"Well!" cried her father, "what are you about there?"</p><p>"I am looking under the bed and the furniture," she replied, continuing
to arrange her hair; "there's no one here."</p><p>"Booby!" yelled her father. "Come here this minute! And don't waste any
time about it!"</p><p>"Coming! Coming!" said she. "One has no time for anything in this
hovel!"</p><p>She hummed:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Vous me quittez pour aller a la gloire;<a href="#ftn.id1172294545706" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172294545706">[29]</sup></a></td></tr><tr><td>Mon triste coeur suivra partout.</td></tr></table><p>She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out, shutting the door
behind her.</p><p>A moment more, and Marius heard the sound of the two young girls' bare
feet in the corridor, and Jondrette's voice shouting to them:—</p><p>"Pay strict heed! One on the side of the barrier, the other at the
corner of the Rue du Petit–Banquier. Don't lose sight for a moment of
the door of this house, and the moment you see anything, rush here on
the instant! as hard as you can go! You have a key to get in."</p><p>The eldest girl grumbled:—</p><p>"The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot!"</p><p>"To–morrow you shall have some dainty little green silk boots!" said the
father.</p><p>They ran down stairs, and a few seconds later the shock of the outer
door as it banged to announced that they were outside.</p><p>There now remained in the house only Marius, the Jondrettes and
probably, also, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a
glimpse in the twilight, behind the door of the unused attic.</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172294599711" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172294599711" class="para"><sup class="para">[28] </sup></a>Our love has lasted a whole week, but how short are the
instants of happiness! To adore each other for eight days was hardly
worth the while! The time of love should last forever.</p></div><div id="ftn.id1172294545706" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172294545706" class="para"><sup class="para">[29] </sup></a>You leave me to go to glory; my sad heart will follow you
everywhere.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
