<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter III</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch35s02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/><link rel="next" href="ch35s04.xhtml" title="Chapter IV"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter III" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337648885340"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter III</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Just Indignation of a Hair-dresser</h3></div></div></div><p>The worthy hair–dresser who had chased from his shop the two little
fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the
elephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an old
soldier of the legion who had served under the Empire. They were
talking. The hair–dresser had, naturally, spoken to the veteran of the
riot, then of General Lamarque, and from Lamarque they had passed to
the Emperor. Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and
soldier which Prudhomme, had he been present, would have enriched with
arabesques, and which he would have entitled: "Dialogue between the
razor and the sword."</p><p>"How did the Emperor ride, sir?" said the barber.</p><p>"Badly. He did not know how to fall—so he never fell."</p><p>"Did he have fine horses? He must have had fine horses!"</p><p>"On the day when he gave me my cross, I noticed his beast. It was a
racing mare, perfectly white. Her ears were very wide apart, her saddle
deep, a fine head marked with a black star, a very long neck, strongly
articulated knees, prominent ribs, oblique shoulders and a powerful
crupper. A little more than fifteen hands in height."</p><p>"A pretty horse," remarked the hair–dresser.</p><p>"It was His Majesty's beast."</p><p>The hair–dresser felt, that after this observation, a short silence
would be fitting, so he conformed himself to it, and then went on:—</p><p>"The Emperor was never wounded but once, was he, sir?"</p><p>The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who
had been there:—</p><p>"In the heel. At Ratisbon. I never saw him so well dressed as on that
day. He was as neat as a new sou."</p><p>"And you, Mr. Veteran, you must have been often wounded?"</p><p>"I?" said the soldier, "ah! not to amount to anything. At Marengo, I
received two sabre–blows on the back of my neck, a bullet in the right
arm at Austerlitz, another in the left hip at Jena. At Friedland,
a thrust from a bayonet, there,—at the Moskowa seven or eight
lance–thrusts, no matter where, at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushed
one of my fingers. Ah! and then at Waterloo, a ball from a biscaien in
the thigh, that's all."</p><p>"How fine that is!" exclaimed the hair–dresser, in Pindaric accents, "to
die on the field of battle! On my word of honor, rather than die in bed,
of an illness, slowly, a bit by bit each day, with drugs, cataplasms,
syringes, medicines, I should prefer to receive a cannon–ball in my
belly!"</p><p>"You're not over fastidious," said the soldier.</p><p>He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop. The
show–window had suddenly been fractured.</p><p>The wig–maker turned pale.</p><p>"Ah, good God!" he exclaimed, "it's one of them!"</p><p>"What?"</p><p>"A cannon–ball."</p><p>"Here it is," said the soldier.</p><p>And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor. It was a
pebble.</p><p>The hair–dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing
at the full speed, towards the Marche Saint–Jean. As he passed the
hair–dresser's shop Gavroche, who had the two brats still in his mind,
had not been able to resist the impulse to say good day to him, and had
flung a stone through his panes.</p><p>"You see!" shrieked the hair–dresser, who from white had turned blue,
"that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it. What
has any one done to that gamin?"</p></section><footer/></body></html>
