<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch35.xhtml" title="Book Eleventh."/><link rel="next" href="ch35s02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter I" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337706740220"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter I</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Some Explanations With Regard to the Origin of Gavroche's Poetry. the Influence of an Academician on This Poetry</h3></div></div></div><p>At the instant when the insurrection, arising from the shock of the
populace and the military in front of the Arsenal, started a movement
in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the
hearse and which, through the whole length of the boulevards, weighed,
so to speak, on the head of the procession, there arose a frightful ebb.
The rout was shaken, their ranks were broken, all ran, fled, made their
escape, some with shouts of attack, others with the pallor of flight.
The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling,
overflowed to right and left, and spread in torrents over two hundred
streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose.</p><p>At that moment, a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue
Menilmontant, holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which
he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville, caught sight of an old
holster–pistol in the show–window of a bric–a–brac merchant's shop.</p><p>"Mother What's–your–name, I'm going to borrow your machine."</p><p>And off he ran with the pistol.</p><p>Two minutes later, a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing
through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse, encountered the lad
brandishing his pistol and singing:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>La nuit on ne voit rien,</td></tr><tr><td>Le jour on voit tres bien,</td></tr><tr><td>D'un ecrit apocrypha</td></tr><tr><td>Le bourgeois s'ebouriffe,</td></tr><tr><td>Pratiquez la vertu,</td></tr><tr><td>Tutu, chapeau pointu!<a href="#ftn.id1172295723430" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172295723430">[44]</sup></a></td></tr></table><p>It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars.</p><p>On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger.</p><p>Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march,
and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion? We
know not. Who does know? Himself, perhaps. However, Gavroche was well
up in all the popular tunes in circulation, and he mingled with them his
own chirpings. An observing urchin and a rogue, he made a potpourri of
the voices of nature and the voices of Paris. He combined the repertory
of the birds with the repertory of the workshops. He was acquainted with
thieves, a tribe contiguous to his own. He had, it appears, been
for three months apprenticed to a printer. He had one day executed a
commission for M. Baour–Lormian, one of the Forty. Gavroche was a gamin
of letters.</p><p>Moreover, Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered
the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously
rainy night, it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of
Providence. His brothers in the evening, his father in the morning;
that is what his night had been like. On quitting the Rue des Ballets
at daybreak, he had returned in haste to the elephant, had artistically
extracted from it the two brats, had shared with them some sort of
breakfast which he had invented, and had then gone away, confiding
them to that good mother, the street, who had brought him up, almost
entirely. On leaving them, he had appointed to meet them at the same
spot in the evening, and had left them this discourse by way of a
farewell: "I break a cane, otherwise expressed, I cut my stick, or, as
they say at the court, I file off. If you don't find papa and mamma,
young 'uns, come back here this evening. I'll scramble you up some
supper, and I'll give you a shakedown." The two children, picked up by
some policeman and placed in the refuge, or stolen by some mountebank,
or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris,
did not return. The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of
these lost traces. Gavroche did not see them again. Ten or twelve weeks
had elapsed since that night. More than once he had scratched the back
of his head and said: "Where the devil are my two children?"</p><p>In the meantime, he had arrived, pistol in hand, in the Rue du
Pont–aux–Choux. He noticed that there was but one shop open in that
street, and, a matter worthy of reflection, that was a pastry–cook's
shop. This presented a providential occasion to eat another
apple–turnover before entering the unknown. Gavroche halted, fumbled in
his fob, turned his pocket inside out, found nothing, not even a sou,
and began to shout: "Help!"</p><p>It is hard to miss the last cake.</p><p>Nevertheless, Gavroche pursued his way.</p><p>Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint–Louis. While traversing the
Rue du Parc–Royal, he felt called upon to make good the loss of the
apple–turnover which had been impossible, and he indulged himself in the
immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight.</p><p>A little further on, on catching sight of a group of comfortable–looking
persons, who seemed to be landed proprietors, he shrugged his shoulders
and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as
they passed:</p><p>"How fat those moneyed men are! They're drunk! They just wallow in good
dinners. Ask 'em what they do with their money. They don't know. They
eat it, that's what they do! As much as their bellies will hold."</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172295723430" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172295723430" class="para"><sup class="para">[44] </sup></a>At night one sees nothing, by day one sees very well;
the bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl, practice virtue,
tutu, pointed hat!</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
