<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch36s05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/><link rel="next" href="ch36s07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter VI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337640446180"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter VI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Waiting</h3></div></div></div><p>During those hours of waiting, what did they do?</p><p>We must needs tell, since this is a matter of history.</p><p>While the men made bullets and the women lint, while a large saucepan
of melted brass and lead, destined to the bullet–mould smoked over a
glowing brazier, while the sentinels watched, weapon in hand, on the
barricade, while Enjolras, whom it was impossible to divert, kept an
eye on the sentinels, Combeferre, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly,
Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and some others, sought each other out and
united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their
student life, and, in one corner of this wine–shop which had been
converted into a casement, a couple of paces distant from the redoubt
which they had built, with their carbines loaded and primed resting
against the backs of their chairs, these fine young fellows, so close to
a supreme hour, began to recite love verses.</p><p>What verses? These:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Vous rappelez–vous notre douce vie,</td></tr><tr><td>Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux,</td></tr><tr><td>Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie</td></tr><tr><td>Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux,</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age,</td></tr><tr><td>Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans,</td></tr><tr><td>Et que, dans notre humble et petit menage,</td></tr><tr><td>Tout, meme l'hiver, nous etait printemps?</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Beaux jours! Manuel etait fier et sage,</td></tr><tr><td>Paris s'asseyait a de saints banquets,</td></tr><tr><td>Foy lancait la foudre, et votre corsage</td></tr><tr><td>Avait une epingle ou je me piquais.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Tout vous contemplait. Avocat sans causes,</td></tr><tr><td>Quand je vous menais au Prado diner,</td></tr><tr><td>Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses</td></tr><tr><td>Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Je les entendais dire: Est elle belle!</td></tr><tr><td>Comme elle sent bon!  Quels cheveux a flots!</td></tr><tr><td>Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile,</td></tr><tr><td>Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>J'errais avec toi, pressant ton bras souple.</td></tr><tr><td>Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme</td></tr><tr><td>Avait marie, dans notre heureux couple,</td></tr><tr><td>Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Nous vivions caches, contents, porte close,</td></tr><tr><td>Devorant l'amour, bon fruit defendu,</td></tr><tr><td>Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose</td></tr><tr><td>Que deja ton coeur avait repondu.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>La Sorbonne etait l'endroit bucolique</td></tr><tr><td>Ou je t'adorais du soir au matin.</td></tr><tr><td>C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique</td></tr><tr><td>La carte du Tendre au pays Latin.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>O place Maubert! o place Dauphine!</td></tr><tr><td>Quand, dans le taudis frais et printanier,</td></tr><tr><td>Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine,</td></tr><tr><td>Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>J'ai fort lu Platon, mais rien ne m'en reste;</td></tr><tr><td>Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais,</td></tr><tr><td>Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste</td></tr><tr><td>Avec une fleur que tu me donnais.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Je t'obeissais, tu m' etais soumise;</td></tr><tr><td>O grenier dore! te lacer! te voir</td></tr><tr><td>Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise,</td></tr><tr><td>Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Et qui done pourrait perde la memoire</td></tr><tr><td>De ces temps d'aurore et de firmament,</td></tr><tr><td>De rubans, de fleurs, de gaze et de moire,</td></tr><tr><td>Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant?</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Nos jardins etaient un pot de tulipe;</td></tr><tr><td>Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon;</td></tr><tr><td>Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe,</td></tr><tr><td>Et je te donnais le tasse en japon.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire!</td></tr><tr><td>Ton manchon brule, ton boa perdu!</td></tr><tr><td>Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare</td></tr><tr><td>Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu!</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>J'etais mendiant et toi charitable.</td></tr><tr><td>Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds.</td></tr><tr><td>Dante in folio nous servait de table</td></tr><tr><td>Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>La premiere fois qu'en mon joyeux bouge</td></tr><tr><td>Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu,</td></tr><tr><td>Quand tu t'en allais decoiffee et rouge,</td></tr><tr><td>Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu!</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Te rappelles–tu nos bonheurs sans nombre,</td></tr><tr><td>Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons?</td></tr><tr><td>Oh que de soupirs, de nos coeurs pleins d'ombre,</td></tr><tr><td>Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds!<a href="#ftn.id1172295679794" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172295679794">[53]</sup></a></td></tr></table><p>The hour, the spot, these souvenirs of youth recalled, a few stars
which began to twinkle in the sky, the funeral repose of those deserted
streets, the imminence of the inexorable adventure, which was in
preparation, gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low
tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire, who, as we have said, was a gentle
poet.</p><p>In the meantime, a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade, and in
the large one, one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on
Shrove–Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks, on their way
to la Courtille. These torches, as the reader has seen, came from the
Faubourg Saint–Antoine.</p><p>The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving–stones closed on
three sides to shelter it from the wind, and disposed in such a fashion
that all the light fell on the flag. The street and the barricade
remained sunk in gloom, and nothing was to be seen except the red flag
formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark–lantern.</p><p>This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag, with an indescribable and
terrible purple.</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172295679794" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172295679794" class="para"><sup class="para">[53] </sup></a>Do you remember our sweet life, when we were both so
young, and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well
dressed and in love? When, by adding your age to my age, we could
not count forty years between us, and when, in our humble and tiny
household, everything was spring to us even in winter. Fair days!
Manuel was proud and wise, Paris sat at sacred banquets, Foy launched
thunderbolts, and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself.
Everything gazed upon you. A briefless lawyer, when I took you to the
Prado to dine, you were so beautiful that the roses seemed to me to turn
round, and I heard them say: Is she not beautiful! How good she smells!
What billowing hair! Beneath her mantle she hides a wing. Her charming
bonnet is hardly unfolded. I wandered with thee, pressing thy supple
arm. The passers–by thought that love bewitched had wedded, in our happy
couple, the gentle month of April to the fair month of May. We lived
concealed, content, with closed doors, devouring love, that sweet
forbidden fruit. My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had
already responded. The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored thee
from eve till morn. 'Tis thus that an amorous soul applies the chart of
the Tender to the Latin country. O Place Maubert! O Place Dauphine!
When in the fresh spring–like hut thou didst draw thy stocking on thy
delicate leg, I saw a star in the depths of the garret. I have read
a great deal of Plato, but nothing of it remains by me; better than
Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial
goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me, I obeyed thee, thou
didst submit to me; oh gilded garret! to lace thee! to behold thee going
and coming from dawn in thy chemise, gazing at thy young brow in thine
ancient mirror! And who, then, would forego the memory of those days of
aurora and the firmament, of flowers, of gauze and of moire, when love
stammers a charming slang? Our gardens consisted of a pot of tulips;
thou didst mask the window with thy petticoat; I took the earthenware
bowl and I gave thee the Japanese cup. And those great misfortunes which
made us laugh! Thy cuff scorched, thy boa lost! And that dear portrait
of the divine Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup! I
was a beggar and thou wert charitable. I kissed thy fresh round arms
in haste. A folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a
centime's worth of chestnuts. The first time that, in my joyous den, I
snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip, when thou wentest forth, dishevelled
and blushing, I turned deathly pale and I believed in God. Dost thou
recall our innumerable joys, and all those fichus changed to rags? Oh!
what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly
depths!</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
