<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch38.xhtml" title="Book Fourteenth."/><link rel="next" href="ch38s02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter I" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337689898220"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter I</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Flag; Act First</h3></div></div></div><p>As yet, nothing had come. Ten o'clock had sounded from Saint–Merry.
Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves, carbines in
hand, near the outlet of the grand barricade. They no longer addressed
each other, they listened, seeking to catch even the faintest and most
distant sound of marching.</p><p>Suddenly, in the midst of the dismal calm, a clear, gay, young voice,
which seemed to come from the Rue Saint–Denis, rose and began to sing
distinctly, to the old popular air of "By the Light of the Moon," this
bit of poetry, terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Mon nez est en larmes,</td></tr><tr><td>Mon ami Bugeaud,</td></tr><tr><td>Prete moi tes gendarmes</td></tr><tr><td>Pour leur dire un mot.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>En capote bleue,</td></tr><tr><td>La poule au shako,</td></tr><tr><td>Voici la banlieue!</td></tr><tr><td>Co–cocorico!<a href="#ftn.id1172295722792" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172295722792">[54]</sup></a></td></tr></table><p>They pressed each other's hands.</p><p>"That is Gavroche," said Enjolras.</p><p>"He is warning us," said Combeferre.</p><p>A hasty rush troubled the deserted street; they beheld a being more
agile than a clown climb over the omnibus, and Gavroche bounded into the
barricade, all breathless, saying:—</p><p>"My gun! Here they are!"</p><p>An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade, and the sound of
hands seeking their guns became audible.</p><p>"Would you like my carbine?" said Enjolras to the lad.</p><p>"I want a big gun," replied Gavroche.</p><p>And he seized Javert's gun.</p><p>Two sentinels had fallen back, and had come in almost at the same moment
as Gavroche. They were the sentinels from the end of the street, and the
vidette of the Rue de la Petite–Truanderie. The vidette of the Lane des
Precheurs had remained at his post, which indicated that nothing was
approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles.</p><p>The Rue de la Chanvrerie, of which a few paving–stones alone were dimly
visible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag, offered
to the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a
smoke.</p><p>Each man had taken up his position for the conflict.</p><p>Forty–three insurgents, among whom were Enjolras, Combeferre,
Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and Gavroche, were kneeling inside
the large barricade, with their heads on a level with the crest of the
barrier, the barrels of their guns and carbines aimed on the stones as
though at loop–holes, attentive, mute, ready to fire. Six, commanded
by Feuilly, had installed themselves, with their guns levelled at their
shoulders, at the windows of the two stories of Corinthe.</p><p>Several minutes passed thus, then a sound of footsteps, measured, heavy,
and numerous, became distinctly audible in the direction of Saint–Leu.
This sound, faint at first, then precise, then heavy and sonorous,
approached slowly, without halt, without intermission, with a tranquil
and terrible continuity. Nothing was to be heard but this. It was that
combined silence and sound, of the statue of the commander, but this
stony step had something indescribably enormous and multiple about it
which awakened the idea of a throng, and, at the same time, the idea
of a spectre. One thought one heard the terrible statue Legion marching
onward. This tread drew near; it drew still nearer, and stopped. It
seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard at the end of
the street. Nothing was to be seen, however, but at the bottom of that
dense obscurity there could be distinguished a multitude of metallic
threads, as fine as needles and almost imperceptible, which moved about
like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one sees beneath
one's closed eyelids, in the first mists of slumber at the moment
when one is dropping off to sleep. These were bayonets and gun–barrels
confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the torch.</p><p>A pause ensued, as though both sides were waiting. All at once, from the
depths of this darkness, a voice, which was all the more sinister, since
no one was visible, and which appeared to be the gloom itself speaking,
shouted:—</p><p>"Who goes there?"</p><p>At the same time, the click of guns, as they were lowered into position,
was heard.</p><p>Enjolras replied in a haughty and vibrating tone:—</p><p>"The French Revolution!"</p><p>"Fire!" shouted the voice.</p><p>A flash empurpled all the facades in the street as though the door of a
furnace had been flung open, and hastily closed again.</p><p>A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade. The red flag fell.
The discharge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut the
staff, that is to say, the very tip of the omnibus pole.</p><p>Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetrated
the barricade and wounded several men.</p><p>The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing. The attack
had been rough, and of a nature to inspire reflection in the boldest.
It was evident that they had to deal with an entire regiment at the very
least.</p><p>"Comrades!" shouted Courfeyrac, "let us not waste our powder. Let us
wait until they are in the street before replying."</p><p>"And, above all," said Enjolras, "let us raise the flag again."</p><p>He picked up the flag, which had fallen precisely at his feet.</p><p>Outside, the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard; the
troops were re–loading their arms.</p><p>Enjolras went on:—</p><p>"Who is there here with a bold heart? Who will plant the flag on the
barricade again?"</p><p>Not a man responded. To mount on the barricade at the very moment when,
without any doubt, it was again the object of their aim, was simply
death. The bravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation. Enjolras
himself felt a thrill. He repeated:—</p><p>"Does no one volunteer?"</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172295722792" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172295722792" class="para"><sup class="para">[54] </sup></a>My nose is in tears, my friend Bugeaud, lend me thy
gendarmes that I may say a word to them. With a blue capote and a
chicken in his shako, here's the banlieue, co–cocorico.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
