<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IV</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch39s03.xhtml" title="Chapter III"/><link rel="next" href="pt05.xhtml" title="Volume V: Jean Valjean"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter IV" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337692101880"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter IV</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Gavroche's Excess of Zeal</h3></div></div></div><p>In the meantime, Gavroche had had an adventure.</p><p>Gavroche, after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du
Chaume, entered the Rue des Vielles–Haudriettes, and not seeing "even a
cat" there, he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the
song of which he was capable. His march, far from being retarded by his
singing, was accelerated by it. He began to sow along the sleeping or
terrified houses these incendiary couplets:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"L'oiseau medit dans les charmilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Et pretend qu'hier Atala</td></tr><tr><td>Avec un Russe s'en alla.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Mon ami Pierrot, tu babilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Parce que l'autre jour Mila</td></tr><tr><td>Cogna sa vitre et m'appela,</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Les drolesses sont fort gentilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Leur poison qui m'ensorcela</td></tr><tr><td>Griserait Monsieur Orfila.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"J'aime l'amour et les bisbilles,</td></tr><tr><td>J'aime Agnes, j'aime Pamela,</td></tr><tr><td>Lisa en m'allumant se brula.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Jadis, quand je vis les mantilles</td></tr><tr><td>De Suzette et de Zeila,</td></tr><tr><td>Mon ame aleurs plis se mela,</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Amour, quand dans l'ombre ou tu brilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Tu coiffes de roses Lola,</td></tr><tr><td>Je me damnerais pour cela.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Jeanne a ton miroir tu t'habilles!</td></tr><tr><td>Mon coeur un beau jour s'envola.</td></tr><tr><td>Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l'a.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Le soir, en sortant des quadrilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Je montre aux etoiles Stella,</td></tr><tr><td>Et je leur dis: 'Regardez–la.'</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la."<a href="#ftn.id1172294404982" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172294404982">[56]</sup></a></td></tr></table><p>Gavroche, as he sang, was lavish of his pantomime. Gesture is the strong
point of the refrain. His face, an inexhaustible repertory of masks,
produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a
cloth torn in a high gale. Unfortunately, as he was alone, and as it was
night, this was neither seen nor even visible. Such wastes of riches do
occur.</p><p>All at once, he stopped short.</p><p>"Let us interrupt the romance," said he.</p><p>His feline eye had just descried, in the recess of a carriage door,
what is called in painting, an ensemble, that is to say, a person and
a thing; the thing was a hand–cart, the person was a man from Auvergene
who was sleeping therein.</p><p>The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement, and the Auvergnat's head
was supported against the front of the cart. His body was coiled up on
this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground.</p><p>Gavroche, with his experience of the things of this world, recognized
a drunken man. He was some corner errand–man who had drunk too much and
was sleeping too much.</p><p>"There now," thought Gavroche, "that's what the summer nights are good
for. We'll take the cart for the Republic, and leave the Auvergnat for
the Monarchy."</p><p>His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light:—</p><p>"How bully that cart would look on our barricade!"</p><p>The Auvergnat was snoring.</p><p>Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind, and at the Auvergnat
from the front, that is to say, by the feet, and at the expiration of
another minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the
pavement.</p><p>The cart was free.</p><p>Gavroche, habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters, had
everything about him. He fumbled in one of his pockets, and pulled from
it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter.</p><p>He wrote:—</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>"French Republic."</p></blockquote></div><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>"Received thy cart."</p></blockquote></div><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>And he signed it:  "GAVROCHE."</p></blockquote></div><p>That done, he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring
Auvergnat's velvet vest, seized the cart shafts in both hands, and set
off in the direction of the Halles, pushing the cart before him at a
hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar.</p><p>This was perilous. There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment.
Gavroche did not think of this. This post was occupied by the National
Guards of the suburbs. The squad began to wake up, and heads were raised
from camp beds. Two street lanterns broken in succession, that ditty
sung at the top of the lungs. This was a great deal for those cowardly
streets, which desire to go to sleep at sunset, and which put the
extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour. For the last hour,
that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement,
the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeant of the banlieue lent an
ear. He waited. He was a prudent man.</p><p>The mad rattle of the cart, filled to overflowing the possible measure
of waiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance.</p><p>"There's a whole band of them there!" said he, "let us proceed gently."</p><p>It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that
it was stalking abroad through the quarter.</p><p>And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread.</p><p>All at once, Gavroche, pushing his cart in front of him, and at the very
moment when he was about to turn into the Rue des Vielles–Haudriettes,
found himself face to face with a uniform, a shako, a plume, and a gun.</p><p>For the second time, he stopped short.</p><p>"Hullo," said he, "it's him. Good day, public order."</p><p>Gavroche's amazement was always brief and speedily thawed.</p><p>"Where are you going, you rascal?" shouted the sergeant.</p><p>"Citizen," retorted Gavroche, "I haven't called you 'bourgeois' yet. Why
do you insult me?"</p><p>"Where are you going, you rogue?"</p><p>"Monsieur," retorted Gavroche, "perhaps you were a man of wit yesterday,
but you have degenerated this morning."</p><p>"I ask you where are you going, you villain?"</p><p>Gavroche replied:—</p><p>"You speak prettily. Really, no one would suppose you as old as you are.
You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece. That would
yield you five hundred francs."</p><p>"Where are you going? Where are you going? Where are you going, bandit?"</p><p>Gavroche retorted again:—</p><p>"What villainous words! You must wipe your mouth better the first time
that they give you suck."</p><p>The sergeant lowered his bayonet.</p><p>"Will you tell me where you are going, you wretch?"</p><p>"General," said Gavroche "I'm on my way to look for a doctor for my wife
who is in labor."</p><p>"To arms!" shouted the sergeant.</p><p>The master–stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the
very means that have ruined them; Gavroche took in the whole situation
at a glance. It was the cart which had told against him, it was the
cart's place to protect him.</p><p>At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent
on Gavroche, the cart, converted into a projectile and launched with all
the latter's might, rolled down upon him furiously, and the sergeant,
struck full in the stomach, tumbled over backwards into the gutter while
his gun went off in the air.</p><p>The men of the post had rushed out pell–mell at the sergeant's shout;
the shot brought on a general random discharge, after which they
reloaded their weapons and began again.</p><p>This blind–man's–buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour and
killed several panes of glass.</p><p>In the meanwhile, Gavroche, who had retraced his steps at full speed,
halted five or six streets distant and seated himself, panting, on the
stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants–Rouges.</p><p>He listened.</p><p>After panting for a few minutes, he turned in the direction where the
fusillade was raging, lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and
thrust it forward three times, as he slapped the back of his head with
his right hand; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street–urchindom
has condensed French irony, and which is evidently efficacious, since it
has already lasted half a century.</p><p>This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection.</p><p>"Yes," said he, "I'm splitting with laughter, I'm twisting with
delight, I abound in joy, but I'm losing my way, I shall have to take a
roundabout way. If I only reach the barricade in season!"</p><p>Thereupon he set out again on a run.</p><p>And as he ran:—</p><p>"Ah, by the way, where was I?" said he.</p><p>And he resumed his ditty, as he plunged rapidly through the streets, and
this is what died away in the gloom:—</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Mais il reste encore des bastilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Et je vais mettre le hola</td></tr><tr><td>Dans l'orde public que voila.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Quelqu'un veut–il jouer aux quilles?</td></tr><tr><td>Tout l'ancien monde s'ecroula</td></tr><tr><td>Quand la grosse boule roula.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Vieux bon peuple, a coups de bequilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Cassons ce Louvre ou s'etala</td></tr><tr><td>La monarchie en falbala.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"Nous en avons force les grilles,</td></tr><tr><td>Le roi Charles–Dix ce jour la,</td></tr><tr><td>Tenait mal et se decolla.</td></tr><tr><td>Ou vont les belles filles,</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la."<a href="#ftn.id1172294405582" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172294405582">[57]</sup></a></td></tr></table><p>The post's recourse to arms was not without result. The cart was
conquered, the drunken man was taken prisoner. The first was put in the
pound, the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils
of war as an accomplice. The public ministry of the day proved its
indefatigable zeal in the defence of society, in this instance.</p><p>Gavroche's adventure, which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters
of the Temple, is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly
bourgeois of the Marais, and is entitled in their memories: "The
nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment."</p><p>[THE END OF VOLUME IV. "SAINT DENIS"]</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172294404982" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td><a href="#id1172294404982" class="simplelist"><sup>[56] </sup></a>"The bird slanders in the elms,</td></tr><tr><td>And pretends that yesterday, Atala</td></tr><tr><td>Went off with a Russian,</td></tr><tr><td>Where fair maids go.</td></tr><tr><td>Lon la.</td></tr></table><p><a href="#id1172294404982" class="para"><sup class="para">[56] </sup></a>My friend Pierrot, thou pratest, because Mila knocked at her pane the
other day and called me. The jades are very charming, their poison which
bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila. I'm fond of love and its
bickerings, I love Agnes, I love Pamela, Lise burned herself in setting
me aflame. In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette and of
Zeila, my soul mingled with their folds. Love, when thou gleamest in
the dark thou crownest Lola with roses, I would lose my soul for that.
Jeanne, at thy mirror thou deckest thyself! One fine day, my heart flew
forth. I think that it is Jeanne who has it. At night, when I come from
the quadrilles, I show Stella to the stars, and I say to them: "Behold
her." Where fair maids go, lon la.</p></div><div id="ftn.id1172294405582" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172294405582" class="para"><sup class="para">[57] </sup></a>But some prisons still remain, and I am going to put
a stop to this sort of public order. Does any one wish to play at
skittles? The whole ancient world fell in ruin, when the big ball
rolled. Good old folks, let us smash with our crutches that Louvre where
the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows. We have forced its gates. On
that day, King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
