<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch40s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch40s12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337686472000"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter XI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Shot Which Misses Nothing and Kills No One</h3></div></div></div><p>The assailants' fire continued. Musketry and grape–shot alternated, but
without committing great ravages, to tell the truth. The top alone of
the Corinthe facade suffered; the window on the first floor, and the
attic window in the roof, riddled with buck–shot and biscaiens, were
slowly losing their shape. The combatants who had been posted there had
been obliged to withdraw. However, this is according to the tactics
of barricades; to fire for a long while, in order to exhaust the
insurgents' ammunition, if they commit the mistake of replying. When it
is perceived, from the slackening of their fire, that they have no more
powder and ball, the assault is made. Enjolras had not fallen into this
trap; the barricade did not reply.</p><p>At every discharge by platoons, Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his
tongue, a sign of supreme disdain.</p><p>"Good for you," said he, "rip up the cloth. We want some lint."</p><p>Courfeyrac called the grape–shot to order for the little effect which it
produced, and said to the cannon:</p><p>"You are growing diffuse, my good fellow."</p><p>One gets puzzled in battle, as at a ball. It is probable that this
silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy,
and to make them fear some unexpected incident, and that they felt the
necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of paving–stones, and
of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received
blows without retorting. The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet
glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof. A fireman had placed his
back against a tall chimney, and seemed to be acting as sentinel. His
glance fell directly down into the barricade.</p><p>"There's an embarrassing watcher," said Enjolras.</p><p>Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras' rifle, but he had his own gun.</p><p>Without saying a word, he took aim at the fireman, and, a second later,
the helmet, smashed by a bullet, rattled noisily into the street. The
terrified soldier made haste to disappear. A second observer took his
place. This one was an officer. Jean Valjean, who had re–loaded his
gun, took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer's casque to join the
soldier's. The officer did not persist, and retired speedily. This time
the warning was understood. No one made his appearance thereafter on
that roof; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned.</p><p>"Why did you not kill the man?" Bossuet asked Jean Valjean.</p><p>Jean Valjean made no reply.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
