<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch42s10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch42s12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337646422020"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter XI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Concussion in the Absolute</h3></div></div></div><p>They did not open their lips again during the whole space of their ride.</p><p>What did Jean Valjean want? To finish what he had begun; to warn
Cosette, to tell her where Marius was, to give her, possibly, some other
useful information, to take, if he could, certain final measures. As
for himself, so far as he was personally concerned, all was over; he had
been seized by Javert and had not resisted; any other man than himself
in like situation would, perhaps, have had some vague thoughts connected
with the rope which Thenardier had given him, and of the bars of the
first cell that he should enter; but, let us impress it upon the
reader, after the Bishop, there had existed in Jean Valjean a profound
hesitation in the presence of any violence, even when directed against
himself.</p><p>Suicide, that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which may
contain, in a measure, the death of the soul, was impossible to Jean
Valjean.</p><p>At the entrance to the Rue de l'Homme Arme, the carriage halted, the way
being too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles. Javert and Jean
Valjean alighted.</p><p>The coachman humbly represented to "monsieur l'Inspecteur," that the
Utrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the
assassinated man, and with mire from the assassin. That is the way he
understood it. He added that an indemnity was due him. At the same time,
drawing his certificate book from his pocket, he begged the inspector to
have the goodness to write him "a bit of an attestation."</p><p>Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him, and
said:</p><p>"How much do you want, including your time of waiting and the drive?"</p><p>"It comes to seven hours and a quarter," replied the man, "and my velvet
was perfectly new. Eighty francs, Mr. Inspector."</p><p>Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage.</p><p>Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert's intention to conduct him on
foot to the post of the Blancs–Manteaux or to the post of the Archives,
both of which are close at hand.</p><p>They entered the street. It was deserted as usual. Javert followed Jean
Valjean. They reached No. 7. Jean Valjean knocked. The door opened.</p><p>"It is well," said Javert. "Go up stairs."</p><p>He added with a strange expression, and as though he were exerting an
effort in speaking in this manner:</p><p>"I will wait for you here."</p><p>Jean Valjean looked at Javert. This mode of procedure was but little in
accord with Javert's habits. However, he could not be greatly surprised
that Javert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him, the
confidence of the cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length of
its claws, seeing that Jean Valjean had made up his mind to surrender
himself and to make an end of it. He pushed open the door, entered the
house, called to the porter who was in bed and who had pulled the cord
from his couch: "It is I!" and ascended the stairs.</p><p>On arriving at the first floor, he paused. All sorrowful roads
have their stations. The window on the landing–place, which was a
sash–window, was open. As in many ancient houses, the staircase got its
light from without and had a view on the street. The street–lantern,
situated directly opposite, cast some light on the stairs, and thus
effected some economy in illumination.</p><p>Jean Valjean, either for the sake of getting the air, or mechanically,
thrust his head out of this window. He leaned out over the street. It
is short, and the lantern lighted it from end to end. Jean Valjean was
overwhelmed with amazement; there was no longer any one there.</p><p>Javert had taken his departure.</p></section><footer/></body></html>
