<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch44s06.xhtml" title="Chapter VI"/><link rel="next" href="ch44s08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter VII" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337706580160"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter VII</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Effects of Dreams Mingled With Happiness</h3></div></div></div><p>The lovers saw each other every day. Cosette came with M.
Fauchelevent.—"This is reversing things," said Mademoiselle
Gillenormand, "to have the bride come to the house to do the courting
like this." But Marius' convalescence had caused the habit to become
established, and the arm–chairs of the Rue des Filles–du–Calvaire,
better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de l'Homme
Arme, had rooted it. Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other, but did
not address each other. It seemed as though this had been agreed upon.
Every girl needs a chaperon. Cosette could not have come without
M. Fauchelevent. In Marius' eyes, M. Fauchelevent was the condition
attached to Cosette. He accepted it. By dint of discussing political
matters, vaguely and without precision, from the point of view of the
general amelioration of the fate of all men, they came to say a little
more than "yes" and "no." Once, on the subject of education, which
Marius wished to have free and obligatory, multiplied under all forms
lavished on every one, like the air and the sun in a word, respirable
for the entire population, they were in unison, and they almost
conversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with a certain
loftiness of language—still he lacked something indescribable. M.
Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more, than a
man of the world.</p><p>Marius, inwardly, and in the depths of his thought, surrounded with
all sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent, who was to him simply
benevolent and cold. There were moments when doubts as to his own
recollections occurred to him. There was a void in his memory, a black
spot, an abyss excavated by four months of agony.—Many things had been
lost therein. He had come to the point of asking himself whether it were
really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent, so serious and so calm a
man, in the barricade.</p><p>This was not, however, the only stupor which the apparitions and the
disappearances of the past had left in his mind. It must not be supposed
that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which
force us, even when happy, even when satisfied, to glance sadly behind
us. The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have
vanished contains neither thought nor love. At times, Marius clasped his
face between his hands, and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the
twilight which reigned in his brain. Again he beheld Mabeuf fall, he
heard Gavroche singing amid the grape–shot, he felt beneath his lips the
cold brow of Eponine; Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, Combeferre,
Bossuet, Grantaire, all his friends rose erect before him, then
dispersed into thin air. Were all those dear, sorrowful, valiant,
charming or tragic beings merely dreams? had they actually existed? The
revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke. These great fevers create
great dreams. He questioned himself; he felt himself; all these vanished
realities made him dizzy. Where were they all then? was it really true
that all were dead? A fall into the shadows had carried off all except
himself. It all seemed to him to have disappeared as though behind the
curtain of a theatre. There are curtains like this which drop in life.
God passes on to the following act.</p><p>And he himself—was he actually the same man? He, the poor man, was
rich; he, the abandoned, had a family; he, the despairing, was to marry
Cosette. It seemed to him that he had traversed a tomb, and that he had
entered into it black and had emerged from it white, and in that tomb
the others had remained. At certain moments, all these beings of the
past, returned and present, formed a circle around him, and overshadowed
him; then he thought of Cosette, and recovered his serenity; but nothing
less than this felicity could have sufficed to efface that catastrophe.</p><p>M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings.
Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was
the same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood, sitting so gravely
beside Cosette. The first was, probably, one of those nightmares
occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium. However,
the natures of both men were rigid, no question from Marius to M.
Fauchelevent was possible. Such an idea had not even occurred to him. We
have already indicated this characteristic detail.</p><p>Two men who have a secret in common, and who, by a sort of tacit
agreement, exchange not a word on the subject, are less rare than is
commonly supposed.</p><p>Once only, did Marius make the attempt. He introduced into the
conversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and, turning to M. Fauchelevent,
he said to him:</p><p>"Of course, you are acquainted with that street?"</p><p>"What street?"</p><p>"The Rue de la Chanvrerie."</p><p>"I have no idea of the name of that street," replied M. Fauchelevent, in
the most natural manner in the world.</p><p>The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the
street itself, appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really
was.</p><p>"Decidedly," thought he, "I have been dreaming. I have been subject to
a hallucination. It was some one who resembled him. M. Fauchelevent was
not there."'</p></section><footer/></body></html>
