<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter V</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch44s04.xhtml" title="Chapter IV"/><link rel="next" href="ch44s06.xhtml" title="Chapter VI"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter V" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337708579320"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter V</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">Deposit Your Money in a Forest Rather Than With a Notary</h3></div></div></div><p>The reader has, no doubt, understood, without necessitating a lengthy
explanation, that Jean Valjean, after the Champmathieu affair, had been
able, thanks to his first escape of a few days' duration, to come to
Paris and to withdraw in season, from the hands of Laffitte, the
sum earned by him, under the name of Monsieur Madeleine, at
Montreuil–sur–Mer; and that fearing that he might be recaptured,—which
eventually happened—he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest
of Montfermeil, in the locality known as the Blaru–bottom. The sum,
six hundred and thirty thousand francs, all in bank–bills, was not very
bulky, and was contained in a box; only, in order to preserve the
box from dampness, he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut
shavings. In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures, the
Bishop's candlesticks. It will be remembered that he had carried off
the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil–sur–Mer. The man
seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle, was Jean Valjean.
Later on, every time that Jean Valjean needed money, he went to get it
in the Blaru–bottom. Hence the absences which we have mentioned. He had
a pickaxe somewhere in the heather, in a hiding–place known to himself
alone. When he beheld Marius convalescent, feeling that the hour was at
hand, when that money might prove of service, he had gone to get it;
it was he again, whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods, but on
this occasion, in the morning instead of in the evening. Boulatreulle
inherited his pickaxe.</p><p>The actual sum was five hundred and eighty–four thousand, five hundred
francs. Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself.—"We
shall see hereafter," he thought.</p><p>The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand
francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years,
from 1823 to 1833. The five years of his stay in the convent had cost
only five thousand francs.</p><p>Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney–piece, where they
glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint.</p><p>Moreover, Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert. The
story had been told in his presence, and he had verified the fact in
the Moniteur, how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned
under a boat belonging to some laundresses, between the Pont au Change
and the Pont–Neuf, and that a writing left by this man, otherwise
irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors, pointed to a fit
of mental aberration and a suicide.—"In fact," thought Jean Valjean,
"since he left me at liberty, once having got me in his power, he must
have been already mad."</p></section><footer/></body></html>
