<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch48s05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/><link rel="next" href="ch48s07.xhtml" title="Letter to M. Daelli"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="Chapter VI" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70337646604740"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">Chapter VI</h2></div><div><h3 class="subtitle">The Grass Covers and the Rain Effaces</h3></div></div></div><p>In the cemetery of Pere–Lachaise, in the vicinity of the common grave,
far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from all
the tombs of fancy which display in the presence of eternity all the
hideous fashions of death, in a deserted corner, beside an old wall,
beneath a great yew tree over which climbs the wild convolvulus, amid
dandelions and mosses, there lies a stone. That stone is no more exempt
than others from the leprosy of time, of dampness, of the lichens and
from the defilement of the birds. The water turns it green, the air
blackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond of
walking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet
are immediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards
come thither. All around there is a quivering of weeds. In the spring,
linnets warble in the trees.</p><p>This stone is perfectly plain. In cutting it the only thought was the
requirements of the tomb, and no other care was taken than to make the
stone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man.</p><p>No name is to be read there.</p><p>Only, many years ago, a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines,
which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust, and
which are, to–day, probably effaced:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Il dort. Quoique le sort fut pour lui bien etrange,</td></tr><tr><td>Il vivait. Il mourut quand il n'eut plus son ange.</td></tr><tr><td>La chose simplement d'elle–meme arriva,</td></tr><tr><td>Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s'en va.<a href="#ftn.id1172295644142" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="id1172295644142">[70]</sup></a></td></tr></table><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.id1172295644142" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#id1172295644142" class="para"><sup class="para">[70] </sup></a>He sleeps. Although his fate was very strange, he lived.
He died when he had no longer his angel. The thing came to pass simply,
of itself, as the night comes when day is gone.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>
